AI-directed gene fusing prolongs the evolutionary half-life of synthetic gene circuits
Short title: Improving expression via leaky gene fusions

Itamar Menuhin-Gruman1, Matan Arbel-Groissman2, Doron Naki2, Shaked Bergman1, and Tamir Tuller1,3*

1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 6997801
2 Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 6997801
3 The Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: 972-3-6405836; Fax: 972-3-6407308; Email: tamirtul@tauex.tau.ac.il. 

Abstract
Evolutionary instability is a persistent challenge in synthetic biology, often leading to the loss of heterologous gene expression over time. Here, we present STABLES, a gene fusion strategy that links a gene of interest (GOI) to an essential endogenous gene (EG), with a “leaky” stop codon in between. This ensures both selective pressure against deleterious mutations and high expression of the GOI. By leveraging a machine learning (ML) framework, we predict optimal GOI-EG pairs based on bioinformatic and biophysical features, identify linkers likely to minimize protein misfolding, and optimize DNA sequences for stability and expression. Experimental validation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae demonstrated substantial improvements in stability and productivity for fluorescent proteins and human proinsulin. The results highlight a scalable, adaptable and organism-agnostic method to enhance the evolutionary stability of engineered strains, with broad implications for industrial biotechnology and synthetic biology.
________________________________________
Introduction
Synthetic biology enables the engineering of biological systems for diverse applications, including therapeutic protein production, biosensing, and biomanufacturing (1–14). A key challenge in scaling these systems is maintaining the stability of engineered genes over evolutionary timescales (15–30). Heterologous gene expression often imposes a metabolic burden on host organisms, creating a selective advantage for mutants that reduce or eliminate expression. Over time, this leads to the loss of functionality and impairs the viability of engineered systems for industrial or environmental use (28, 31–36). In addition, this adds regulatory concerns and limits use of synthetic biology out of the lab, as it leads to lack of control over the generated sequences (2, 8, 37–39).
Several approaches have been explored to address evolutionary instability of the Gene Of Interest (GOI). Some strategies include generating libraries of complementary parts (40, 41), limiting the user to selected elements and managing only the problem of repetitive elements – a partial solution. Others entail fine-tuning population dynamics (23, 42–44), requiring designing several strains, tailored solutions, and much experimental tweaking. Many strategies attempt coupling gene expression of the GOI to the expression of an essential gene, and thus to host fitness. Some do so by engineering gene overlap (15, 45, 46) – a solution requiring much computational design, which works only for highly-specific cases where such overlap is possible. Others require designing biosensors which detect the protein of interest or byproducts, and activate essential genes based on these biosensors – this solution is highly specific and requires much effort, if possible (47, 48). Yet another solution suggests using the same promoter for both genes, on separate reading frames – mutations to the promoter which prove deleterious to the GOI, would also prove deleterious to the essential gene, leading to loss of fitness (22). All these strategies have shown some success but are limited by technical complexity, preventing only specific mutation types, lack systematic tools, or are constrained to specific settings, genes or organisms.
In this paper, we introduce STABLES (Stop-codon Tunable Alternative Bifunctional mRNA Leading to Expression and Stability). It is a comprehensive approach to enhancing evolutionary stability through gene fusion. Our strategy involves physically linking the GOI to an EG via a shared promoter, on a single open reading frame (ORF), coupled with a "leaky" stop codon to enable differential expression levels (49–52). To optimize this system, we developed a machine learning (ML) tool that predicts the best EG partners for a given GOI, selects linkers likely to minimize protein misfolding using biophysical models of disorder (53–60), and generates codon-optimized DNA sequences for stability and high expression (21, 61–63).
We validated STABLES in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae by stabilizing the expression of fluorescent proteins and the industrially relevant protein human proinsulin (64). GOI fused to selected EGs showed greatly enhanced stability and production over successive generations compared to controls. This study provides a scalable, flexible framework for stabilizing synthetic genes, offering a broad range of potential applications in synthetic biology and biomanufacturing.

Results
Overview of the STABLES Fusion Strategy
In this paper, we introduce STABLES, a comprehensive approach to enhancing evolutionary stability through gene fusion. It is host and GOI agnostic, robust to many mutations, and provides a generic, systematic, simple framework. Our design includes the following components (Fig. 1):
	The gene of interest (GOI), to be expressed in the host organism.
	An endogenous gene (EG), selected for optimal gene expression and mutational stability using an ML model. This model is based on meaningful bioinformatic features, and empirical data in S. Cerevisiae. The GOI and EG are expressed on a shared promoter, on a single ORF, where the GOI’s C-terminus is fused to the EG’s N-terminus.
	 The linker is selected to minimize disruption to protein folding by comparing disorder profiles of the GOI and EG before and after fusion, using biophysical models. A commercial linker yielding minimal change is chosen (53–60) (See Methods). 
	The fusion gene is optimized for gene expression and avoidance of mutationally unstable sites (21, 61–63). This includes optimization of the GOI, linker, and depending on use case, the EG as well. 
	A leaky stop codon is placed after the GOI. This is a stop codon with a positive rate of read-through. This leads to the generation of two proteins – either the GOI alone, or the fusion protein. The rate of expression for the two proteins can be controlled, through selection of an appropriate rate of read-through (49–52). A codon is selected such that the fusion protein is produced in barely viable quantities for the host’s growth, while maintaining much higher expression in favor of the GOI’s protein alone - as this is the derived, relevant product. By ensuring just barely viable quantities of the fusion protein, the host’s mutational stability is further enhanced, as many more mutations would prove deleterious. 
	The EG in its native form is deleted from the host and replaced by this gene fusion. The host is now dependent on the fusion protein to provide the original EG function. Many mutations that would have reduced production or caused misfolding of the GOI, whether in GOI or promoter, would now reduce production of the fusion protein beneath viable quantities. Due to the host’s dependence on this protein, this leads to host lethality, and these mutations do not take hold in the population. 

Fusion Strategy Improves Evolutionary Stability
To assess the impact of the fusion strategy, we evaluated the stability of GFP fused to various endogenous genes (EGs) by examining 10 strains from a previously described library of N-terminally GFP-tagged genes in S. cerevisiae (65, 66). Fluorescence was used as a proxy for expression for 15 days.
This experiment was conducted prior to the creation of the EG selection mechanism – it was designed to give an indication of the need for such a model and its potential impact. For this purpose, meaningful bioinformatic features were generated for all EG, and they were clustered in many clustering configurations. 10 strains were selected such that they were consistently classified to different clusters and were near the centroids of these clusters. This generated a set of strains that were highly varied between them, while being representative of many similar genes. They were compared with a baseline strain of unfused GFP (see Methods section). 
Fluorescence intensity was used as a proxy for functional GFP levels, following established SWAp-Tag library protocols (65, 66). Since GFP fluorescence only occurs after proper β-barrel folding and chromophore maturation (67–71), it directly reflects the abundance of correctly folded, functional protein. This approach has been validated in large-scale GFP-tagging screens (65, 66, 72, 73) and supported by studies showing fluorescence changes arise from protein folding and production rather than intrinsic chromophore brightness (74). By contrast, Western blotting detects all GFP-containing species, including misfolded forms, and is prone to technical variability such as antibody binding and transfer efficiency (75–79).

The experiment (Fig. 2.A.) validated the following conclusions, emphasizing the need for an EG selector:
	Most strains demonstrated decline over the course of the experiment, emphasizing the existence of mutational instability and the need to improve it.
	GOI-EG fusions exhibited slower declines in fluorescence compared to unfused GFP, confirming that fusion of genes enhances stability.
	Different EGs yielded varying degrees of stability, demonstrating that the stability of a fused gene depends on the endogenous gene selected.
	One gene displayed a statistically significant advantage over unfused GFP, emphasizing the need for more informed gene selection. 
For statistical analysis, see supplementary 1.



Machine Learning Predicts Optimal EG-GOI Combinations
The variability in stability observed across different EGs highlighted the importance of systematic EG selection. To address this, we developed a machine learning model to predict EG-GOI fusions that maximize expression and stability (Fig. 2.B., see Methods section). The model was trained on fluorescence data collected from GOI-EG fusion libraries under various conditions in S. cerevisiae (see supplementary 2) (65, 66). As the fluorescence was measured after the variants had time to mutate, this is assumed to capture a combination of both expression and stability.
Using features such as codon usage bias (tRNA adaptation index (80), codon adaptation index (81)), GC content (82), mRNA folding energy (83, 84), ChimeraARS scores (85), and other meaningful bioinformatic features, the model successfully ranked potential fusion pairs. 
In a reasonable use case, a user would generate and utilize very few genetic designs. The model would recommend 1-3 EG, which the user would validate experimentally, and proceed with the design exhibiting best performance. As the models were trained in cross-validation, each EG received a score equal to the quantile of its expression within the test set (e.g., 1.0 for EG with highest expression). Models were evaluated both on their expected performance (median score of EGs recommended by the model among cross-validations) and on their robustness (likelihood of recommending an EG with a low score). For performance measurement with more common and less relevant metrics, see supplementary.
Based on these evaluations, an ensemble model combining k-nearest neighbours (86) (KNN) and XGBoost (87) (XGB) was selected and trained. The KNN model exhibited a high median score, while the XGB model improved the model’s robustness. Selecting the best performance among top 3 candidates, the median score was 0.995, and the scores were above 0.98, (P<0.05, Fig. 2.C.). When selecting only the top performer, the median score was 0.939, and the scores were above 0.92 (P<0.001, Fig. 2.D.). These results underscore the predictive power of the ML model and its ability to systematically identify highly performing gene fusions, enhancing the efficiency of fusion design. Feature importance was calculated for the features, for further insight (Fig. 2.E.).
To evaluate whether expression gene (EG) selection depends on the gene of interest (GOI), we first assessed universal features of high-performing EGs. The union of the top 50 EGs across GFP, RFP, and human proinsulin exhibited shorter lengths (mean: 962 nt vs. 1354 nt; p < 1e 8), higher codon adaptation (tAI: 0.568 vs. 0.360; p < 1e 56), and slightly higher GC content (43.4% vs. 40.3%; p < 1e 19) compared to the yeast genome, indicating compact, codon-optimized EGs are universally favorable.
We then compared the top 10 EGs for each GOI to assess specificity. Overlap among the highest-ranked EGs was limited: no gene appeared in the top position for more than one GOI, and only GFP and insulin shared 2/5 top EGs (Jaccard = 0.25), while other pairs showed no top 5 overlap. At larger sets, moderate overlap emerged (e.g., GFP–insulin top 20 overlap: 14/20; Jaccard = 0.54), suggesting certain EGs are broadly strong performers, but the very top predictions remain GOI-specific.
Feature analysis revealed that RFP-optimized EGs were longer and more codon-adapted than GFP and insulin EGs (length: p < 0.001; tAI: p < 0.005), while GC content did not differ (p > 0.4). Importantly, all top 10 EGs fall within the top 4% of genome-wide tAI scores (quantile ≥ 0.96), highlighting strong codon optimization across targets. These findings underscore the value of ML-based ranking to prioritize optimal, GOI-specific EGs.

Validation with Proinsulin Production
To demonstrate the real-world applicability of our approach, we applied it to stabilize human proinsulin expression in yeast, a biotechnologically relevant system. EGs were selected for high performance in both the XGB and KNN models, and additional engineering needs (see Methods). Thus, our model identified two EGs—CAF20 and ARC15—as suitable fusion partners for proinsulin.
A 30-day in-lab evolution experiment was conducted, where expression level measurements were taken every 5 days, using the ELISA protocol.  The strains tested were the original proinsulin (as patented by Novo Nordisk), the proinsulin as optimized by the Evolutionary Stability Optimizer (ESO) (21), and the optimized sequence fused to CAF20 and ARC15 as fusion genes (Fig. 3.A.). As in the 10-gene experiment, the unfused proinsulin replaced CAN1.
The need for a leader secretion sequence in proinsulin production in yeast has been well documented (88–94). However, it was not clear whether it may disrupt the efficacy of our design. We measured the expression at initiation for the original proinsulin and two fusion genes, with and without a leader sequence (Fig. 3.B.). All variants exhibited much higher expression in the presence of a leader sequence, and thus all further experiments were conducted as such. 
The expression patterns approximately followed an exponential decay pattern, where the fused genes displayed a much slower decay rate (Fig. 3.C.). This enabled us to estimate the cumulative expression of proinsulin over time. These quantities were normalized by the expression estimated for 10 days, for the original proinsulin. The gene fusions showed a fivefold increase in total proinsulin yield over the experimental period (Fig. 3.D.). Interestingly, ARC15 demonstrated better performance for shorter durations (higher initial expression) while CAF20 demonstrated better performance for longer durations (slower decay) – the selection of the optimal gene will depend on the industrial use case.
For the fusion gene with ARC15, we measure 98.5 mg/L at initiation, where for the original sequence, we measure 72.9 mg/L – a ~35% increase at initial expression. For the fusion gene with ARC15, we measure 68.7 mg/L after 30 days, meaning ~70% of expression is maintained. For the original sequence, we measure 4.8 mg/L, meaning only ~7% of expression is maintained.
Nanopore sequencing was conducted on the final sequences. It reveals that following the experiment, the fused proinsulin suffered few mutations, while the unfused proinsulin sequence was lost completely (Fig. 4.A.) (95–98). This has been further validated by western blot (Fig. 4.B.).
We identified several mutations in the CAF20 and ARC15 fusion constructs through nanopore sequencing (Fig. 4A, Supplementary Table X). Notably, all mutations within the proinsulin region were present at similar frequencies both before and after the 105-generation evolution experiment, suggesting they were introduced during cloning or represent sequencing artifacts. 
This includes a shared 1-bp deletion (~20% frequency) in a non-coding spacer between the insulin pre-leader and B subunit found in both the CAF20 and ARC15 constructs; this ostensible deletion of adenine occurs in a homopolymer run of 8 adenines, an area highly prone to sequencing error – making this deletion likely to be an artifact.
The ARC15 construct contained no additional mutations within the proinsulin region. The CAF20 construct, however, exhibited five silent SNPs in the proinsulin coding region; these mutations were likely introduced during cloning, since they appeared in very high frequencies (>99%), and were stable over time. We also observed a 2-nt deletion in codon 9 of CAF20, which increased in frequency from ~40% to ~80% over the course of the experiment, and is located within a homopolymer run of 5 thymines, meaning this deletion is likely to be at least partially a sequencing error. In addition, the relatively high proinsulin protein levels we observed during the experiment support the conjecture that this is completely or predominantly a sequencing error. This mutation, if it is indeed real and not a sequencing error, introduces a premature stop codon. Despite potential sequencing noise, the observed frequency shift suggests it may be under positive selection.

Leaky Stop Codon Enables GOI Production and Overexpression
To enable generation of both the fusion protein and the GOI alone, we utilized leaky stop codons, which allow partial translational read-through (49–52).  
The ability to enforce low but non-zero read-through rates is a key factor in improving the stability and industrial viability of our design. If the fusion protein’s abundance is reduced to barely viable, then it is highly likely that any mutations affecting the GOI’s expression would lead to host lethality, promoting mutational stability. This is in tandem with the enforcement of much higher expression of the isolated GOI, which is the necessary and desired product.
Thus, informed selection of the stop codon is necessary. To enable this informed decision, we conducted an experiment, creating a fusion protein of BFP and mCherry, with different leaky stop codons between. This was expressed on a plasmid (Fig. 4.C.). The red fluorescence is expressed only in the fusion protein, while the blue fluorescence is expressed in both the fusion protein and BFP alone. Thus, the ratio between the fluorescence measurements can be used to derive the rate of read-through (Fig. 4.D.).
We selected the 3 stop codon designs expressing the lowest mCherry fluorescence (to minimize read-through) which was still detectable (to increase cell viability). We conducted another evolution expression, attaching the proinsulin gene to ARC15, either without a stop codon or with one of the 3 selected. This is in accordance with the STABLES design. Using a similar protocol, expression of proinsulin was measured over 50 days, this time capturing the presence of both the fusion protein and the isolated proinsulin. In addition to the secretion of isolated proinsulin (which is a requirement in and of itself), we observed a much higher expression rate, and cumulative expression accordingly (Fig. 4.E.).  
For the fusion gene without a stop codon, we measure 102 mg/L at initiation, where for the best candidate L3, we measure 98 mg/L– a ~4% decrease at initial expression. For the best candidate L3, we measure 83 mg/L after 50 days, meaning ~85% of expression is maintained. For the fusion gene without a stop codon, we measure 15 mg/L, meaning only ~15% of expression is maintained.

 

Discussion
An organism-agnostic strategy to tackle evolutionary instability 
Previous studies proposed methods for increasing mutational stability of the GOI. Some of these methods are either dependent on host-specific pathways, or require design and implementation of complex parts (e.g. biosensors, overlapping genes) which may not be possible. Others require developing multiple strains and managing population dynamics, or provide robustness only to specific mutation types (e.g. repetitive parts, mutations in promoter). This study introduces STABLES, a simple, robust, generic, host and GOI-agnostic strategy to address evolutionary instability in synthetic biology. By fusing the GOI to an EG on the same ORF under a shared promoter, many deleterious mutations would lead to host lethality, leading to higher GOI mutational stability. By incorporating a leaky stop codon, we enable these gene fusions to generate high expression of the GOI alone, while increasing their mutational stability. These, together with informed selection of the linker, sequence optimization and use of a leader sequence, are key in the improved stability and performance observed in our experiments. 
We find that following all our design principles, we observe a 15% decline in expression of proinsulin over 50 days. This contrasts with the original design, which declined by 93% over 30 days. This is in addition to a ~30% increase in initial expression.
Our machine learning tool enhances the utility of this approach by selecting better GOI-EG pairings based on biologically meaningful features. Translational efficiency metrics, such as tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI), emerged as dominant predictors. A possible explanation for this result may be related to the fact that higher translation efficiency tends to be associated with genes that are highly expressed, have higher mRNA levels (due to higher mRNA stability, among other factors), and that are more conserved and thus tend to fold more efficiently (99–103). Other features, including GC content, RNA folding energy, alternative shifted ORFs, and amino acid composition that are probably also associated with higher expression, mRNA stability and robust protein folding.
Protein disorder predictions were employed to guide linker selection, increasing the likelihood that the gene fusions maintain native protein folding and functionality (See Methods). Combined with avoidance of mutational hotspots and sequence optimization for expression and stability, these elements ensure the practical applicability of the approach across a broad range of use cases.
Although our experiments focus on S. cerevisiae, the STABLES framework is broadly generalizable to other organisms. First, the general idea of coupling a heterologous GOI to an essential gene is applicable to any living cell. If performed accurately, such a coupling will induce an addiction of the cell to the fused protein, which will prolong the half-life of the GOI. Moreover, its computational components are designed for cross-species applicability: the essential gene selection model uses organism-agnostic, sequence-based features; linker design relies on biophysical and machine-learning models of protein disorder, which are host-independent; and codon optimization adapts directly to the target organism via the tRNA adaptation index (tAI) maximization. Leaky stop codons, a key feature of STABLES, have been reported in diverse taxa, including bacteria (104, 105), fungi and animals (49), insects and nematodes (106), and mammals (107, 108). Together, these properties make STABLES a flexible and transferable strategy requiring minimal host-specific adaptation.



Future Directions
Using our machine learning model, we have already seen empirical evidence for good performance in predicting high-performing GOI-EG pairs for different GOI, as shown in our experimental validation. Its reliance on sequence-based features enables effective application to non-model organisms, even in the absence of extensive empirical data. However, expanding the dataset used for training the model remains a valuable avenue for further enhancement. Systematic testing for libraries from more host organisms and a broader range of target genes would improve the model’s generalizability and ensure its utility across an even wider variety of synthetic biology applications. Furthermore, in many organisms, epigenetic silencing must be considered when optimizing expression and stability (24, 109–116). While we have designed our model with capabilities to avoid epigenetically silencing motifs, this application should be tested in vivo.
While our method has shown much promise, further experimental validation is needed to refine certain aspects. For example, empirical testing of linker selection will help confirm computational predictions and guide future improvements. An in-depth analysis and testing of the leaky stop codons would also enable further optimization. 
Broader Implications
This study demonstrates the potential to stabilize synthetic genes in both industrial and environmental contexts. In biomanufacturing, the ability to maintain stable GOI expression over extended periods can reduce costs, improve scalability, and simplify regulatory processes. In environmental applications, robust gene fusions could support long-term deployment in dynamic and uncontrolled conditions, enabling breakthroughs in bioremediation and biosensing.
 
Methods
Overview of Gene Fusion Design
We developed a multi-step workflow to design and optimize GOI-EG fusion genes for enhanced evolutionary stability and expression. This process included the selection of EGs using an ML model, the identification of optimal linkers to minimize misfolding, sequence optimization of the synthetic gene to maximize expression and stability, and addition of a low-readthrough leaky stop codon.
________________________________________
Machine Learning Model for EG Selection
The ML model was trained on fluorescence datasets from yeast libraries  (see supplementary 1) (65, 66). The dataset included GOI-EG fusion genes for 5,185 EG (~78% of all EG in yeast), fused with either GFP or mCherry. Fluorescence was measured across multiple time points.
Features and Model Architecture
The model utilized a diverse set of bioinformatic features derived from the sequences of each GOI and EG. Key feature families included:
	Codon Usage Bias:
	tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI): Calculated for the full sequence, first 17 amino acids, and sliding windows across the GOI and EG (80).
	Relative Codon Adaptation (RCA): Evaluated for the GOI, EG, and sliding windows (117).
	Codon Adaptation Index (CAI): Assessed for the full sequence and sliding windows (81).
	Effective Number of Codons (ENC): Measures diversity in codon usage (118).
	Sequence Composition:
	GC Content:: Calculated globally and in sliding windows for both GOI and EG (82).
	k-mer Frequencies: Counts of nucleotide or amino acid substrings of lengths 3–5.
	Amino Acid Frequency Correlation: Spearman correlation between GOI and EG amino acid compositions.
	Thermodynamic Properties:
	Local Folding Energy: Calculated using ViennaRNA (119) in sliding windows (50 bp).
	Chemical Properties:
	Molecular Weight and Hydrophobicity: Computed for both GOI and EG sequences (120).
	Isoelectric Point (pI): Assessed at physiological pH.
	Translation Context:
	Start Codon Context: Features describing the nucleotide flanking regions of start codons.
	Shifted Open Reading Frame (sORF) Length: Alternative reading frame lengths.
	ChimeraARS Score:
	The ChimeraARS score quantifies sequence similarity to a reference set of genes with high codon usage bias. This metric enhances predictions of sequence stability beyond standard codon usage features (85).

The ML pipeline employed an ensemble model combining k-nearest neighbors (KNN) and XGBoost architectures (Fig. 3.A.). The KNN model emphasized features of the EG and provided high median performance - but was prone to failures. The XGB model emphasized features of the GOI, EG, and interaction features, and provided much higher robustness to failure. Hyperparameter tuning and cross-validation were conducted using Optuna to ensure robust performance (Details in supplementary).

Feature Importance in Machine Learning Predictions
Feature importance was analyzed using SHAP (121) (SHapley Additive exPlanations) for XGBoost and forward feature selection for KNN. SHAP provided a global ranking of feature contributions, while forward selection iteratively identified the most impactful features for KNN predictions. The XGBoost results, which were more robust, provided the primary conclusions, while KNN analysis offered additional insights where consistent or complementary.

XGBoost Feature Importance
The SHAP analysis (Figure 3.D.) revealed tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI) (80) as the dominant feature, greatly outpacing all others. Variants with high tAI scores consistently showed enhanced stability and expression, underscoring its central role in optimizing translation. The following influential features were: i) 
	Following tAI, the next most important features were GC content (82) and Relative Codon Adaptation (RCA) (117), both reflecting translational optimization and sequence stability;. Additional influential features included:ii) 
	Amino Acid Frequency Correlation between the GOI and EG, suggesting reduced metabolic burden for similar protein compositions;. iii) 
	Local Folding Energy (119) downstream in the GOI and near the initiation site, emphasizing the importance of avoiding unstable mRNA secondary structures; and (iv). 
	Shifted ORF Length (122–124), Ribosomal Coverage Bias Score (RCBS) (125), and tAI in the First 17 Amino Acids (126–129), which further highlighted the importance of efficient translation, and successful initiation.
KNN Feature Importance
The KNN forward selection supported the importance of codon usage-related features, particularly in the EG. Key features included RCA, tAI, and CAI (81) metrics within the EG and in specific regions, such as the first 17 amino acids. These findings complemented the more GOI-focused insights from XGBoost by emphasizing the role of the EG in overall gene fusion stability.
________________________________________
Linkers for Protein Fusion
Protein misfolding remains a challenge in gene fusion strategies (130–133). While tools such as AlphaFold (134) offer accurate prediction of protein structure, they are too computationally intensive to enable a reasonable comparison between many linkers. Rather, we used tools such as IUPred2A (84), a biophysical model, and MoreRONN (83), a machine learning model, to predict protein disorder profiles and assess the impact of linkers. As protein disorder profiles have a profound effect of protein folding, it is taken as a proxy variable – linkers with smaller effect on the disorder profile are less likely to influence the protein folding, and thus less likely to cause misfolding (57, 58, 135, 136).  Linkers were selected to minimize disruptions to the disorder profile upon fusion, likely preserving native folding patterns of both the GOI and the EG  (53–59). This minimization was applied by calculating the Euclidean distance between the disorder profiles before and after fusion, for the 1,280 linkers in a linker database (59). The linker inducing the smallest distance was selected.
Although experimental validation of the linker selection step remains pending, these predictions provide an essential foundation for mitigating misfolding risks in future applications.
Scoring and Selection
Linkers were scored based on the L2 distance between disorder profiles of the unfused and fused states. The optimal linker was selected to minimize disruptions to native folding patterns, preserving the functionality of both the GOI and EG. Following is the calculation:
ΔG ⃗_l (x)=G ⃗_l (x)-G ⃗_unfused (x)

L_l=‖ΔG ⃗_l (EG)‖_2+‖ΔG ⃗_l (GOI)‖_2

l^*=(argmin)┬(l∈H) (L_l )

Where G ⃗_l (x) is the disorder profile of gene x when fused with linker l, H is the set of commercial linkers reported by (59), and  l^* is the linker yielding the minimum total disruption.
To compute disorder profiles, two complementary models were used to assign a per-residue disorder probability. :
	IUPred2A (84) predicts disorder from estimated inter-residue interaction energies, providing context-sensitive scores (0–1) for both short and long disordered segments. 
	MoreRONN (83) applies a neural network trained on curated datasets to assign disorder probabilities via a sliding-window approach, enabling sensitive detection of flexible regions relevant for fusion design.
________________________________________
Optimizing DNA Sequences for Stability and Expression
Sequence optimization was performed to enhance the stability and expression of the GOI-EG fusion genes using the Evolutionary Stability Optimizer (ESO) (21) pipeline. ESO integrates DNAChisel (137), a tool that optimizes genetic sequences while maintaining biological constraints. ESO has been previously validated for its ability to improve the evolutionary stability of synthetic genes. The ESO pipeline focuses on optimizing codon usage, minimizing mRNA instability, and ensuring the long-term expression of engineered genes by accounting for evolutionary pressures.
Optimization Objectives
	mRNA Folding Optimization.: It has been demonstrated that minimizing the secondary structure formation in mRNA near the translation initiation site, maximizes the expression (119, 138–143). The local folding energy of the first 15 codons in the mRNA sequence was calculated using ViennaRNA (119) and codons were selected to optimize weak folding energy.
	Codon Usage Optimization.: For the rest of the sequence, codon usage was optimized to match the tRNA abundances of S. cerevisiae. This was achieved by calculating and optimizing the tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI) (80) for the GOI, linker, and (depending on the application and relevancy) the EG, ensuring that codon usage patterns align with the host’s translational machinery.
	Stability Enhancements.: Sequences were optimized to avoid hypermutable regions (24, 110, 144–153). 
These optimizations ensure synthetic genes are tailored for host-specific transcription and translation efficiencies, enhancing long-term performance in diverse applications.
________________________________________
Experimental Validation
Fusion Stability in S. cerevisiae
We validated the gene fusions by testing their ability to stabilize GOI expression in S. cerevisiae. Taking the Schuldiner lab library (65, 66) (N' SWAp Tag (SWAT)-GFP, derived from S. cerevisiae BY4741 background strain), we selected variants from it such that the EG are varied and representative. This was performed by performing k-means for k=2…130, 5 iterations each, and selecting the 10 genes most consistently in different clusters, while closest to cluster center. As a control, they were compared with unfused GFP, integrated into the genome by replacing CAN1. The CAN1 gene encodes an arginine permease, which is not essential for yeast survival under laboratory conditions where arginine is supplemented in the medium (154–158).
Their yield was measured over 15 days of in-lab evolution, with 3 repeats each. The evolution experiment took place in 96-Deepwell Plates (Starlab group Cat.No S1896-2110). Fluorescence levels were taken as proxy for protein expression.
We first normalized this value by the OD, to control for yeast density. Furthermore, we performed this analysis for the wild type (WT) yeast, to find the inherent fluorescence of yeast. Following, we detracted this value from other measurements, to isolate the fluorescence due to GFP. 68–72,140
Proinsulin Production in Yeast
To test a biotechnologically relevant application, we applied the workflow to human proinsulin. The proinsulin sequence was obtained from Novo Nordisk patented sequence for proinsulin manufacturing in yeast (patent WO2014195452A1). EGs were selected using the following criteria: i) 
	EG was predicted to be in top 5% for XGBoost architecture. ii) 
	EG was predicted to be in top 10% for KNN architecture, due to less robustness. iii) 
	EG length less than 500nt, to ensure reasonable synthesis of the combined fusion protein. iv) 
	EG has no internal repeats of length > 10, to ensure greater stability. v) 
	EG is not ribosomal, due to many interactions of ribosomal proteins, with many points of failure. vi) 
	EG does not have induced function – they are more sensitive to changes in expression. vii) 
	We chose genes from multiple cellular processes to decrease redundancy. 

We constrained EG length to ≤500 nt to keep the total fusion construct (GOI, linker, EG) under ~1 kb, optimizing DNA synthesis, cloning fidelity, and expression efficiency (159–161). This design choice applied only to synthesized constructs like proinsulin fusions; GFP constructs in Fig. 2 were assembled via SWAp Tag recombination, where EG length was not a limiting factor (65, 66). In our model, shorter EGs showed a weak but significant negative correlation with predicted performance (GFP Spearman ρ = –0.055, p < 10⁻⁵; top-ranked EGs median: 204–750 nt vs. 1,087 nt for lower ranks, p < 0.01). Consistently, proteome-wide analysis of 5,397 verified yeast proteins revealed a small but significant negative correlation between protein abundance and length (log₁₀ abundance vs. length: Pearson r = –0.15, Spearman ρ = –0.19, p < 10⁻³⁰). These trends suggest that shorter EGs are particularly well-suited for robust fusion design. One known cause is that shorter genes often fold efficiently and avoid the complexity associated with co-translational folding signals. By contrast, larger, multi-domain proteins are more susceptible to folding errors and aggregation, and when fused, their intricate folding pathways can interfere with proper expression of both partners (162–165). These considerations reinforce our strategy of favoring shorter EGs in de novo synthesis.

Based on these criteria, CAF20 and ARC15 were selected. 
Four 4 variants were compared, including:: i) 
	tThe original proinsulin sequence, expressed on a high copy number plasmid (Prs426); ii) 
	aA similar variant, where the proinsulin sequence was optimized by the ESO (21);. iii) 
	aA fusion gene composed of optimized proinsulin and CAF20 expressed on a high copy number plasmid in a strain that CAF20 was deleted from the genome; and iv) .
	aA similar variant for ARC15.
Each variant included an alpha leader. The linker 1fzbf was selected.
They were tested for yield over 35 days of in-lab evolution, with 3 repeats each. Proinsulin levels were quantified using ELISA plates according to manufacturer instructions (product number RAB0327) for proinsulin detection and verified by western blot using proinsulin specific antibody (sigma i2018).
The constructs were analyzed through Nanopore sequencing before and after the evolution experiment, for deeper understanding of the accumulated mutations. Nanopore reads were first processed using chopper (95), trimming the first 10nt of each read and keeping reads of length above 500. The reads were mapped with minimap2 (96) to a reference sequence, including the yeast genome and the relevant construct. Quantification of optimized variants’ mRNA levels was conducted using Salmon (97), and variant calling was conducted by DeepVariant (98).

Leaky Stop Codon Rate of Read-through
Selecting and implementing a leaky stop codon is required for our design. We require a rate of read-through such that i) :
	tThe expression of the fusion protein is high enough to generate viable quantities of the fusion protein, required for the cell’s growth. ii) 
	It is the lowest value reasonable, to prove more mutations deleterious. iii) 
	High quantities of the GOI alone are produced, as this maximizes the output of the system. 
To enable an informed selection for our stop codons, we generated different stop codons using the design principles outlined in (166). In this paper, Riboseq is conducted on all genes in S. Cerevisiae. They created a predictive model for rate of read-through and found the most influential feature to be the context around the stop codon – from 3 nts before to 6 after, 12 nts total. Further refining the model, they created a ranking of leakiness based on nt at each position. Using these rankings, we generated sequences predicted to be with high read-through rates. 
We conducted an experiment where we implemented a fusion gene on a plasmid. This fusion gene was composed of BFP connected to the C’ terminus of mCherry, with the different leaky stop codons generated. The fluorescence of BFP is proxy for the expression of both the GOI and the fusion protein, and the fluorescence of mCherry is proxy for the expression of only the fusion protein. 
We selected 3 stop codon designs such that i) :
	tThe rate of read-through, as measured in the mCherry relative fluorescence, is in the range of 0.1-0.25; .ii) 
	tThe relative fluorescence of BFP, indicative of the expression of isolated GOI, is greater than 0.9; and iii) .
	The last amino acid in proinsulin is unchanged.
We conducted another evolution experiment. 4 variants were generated. In each, they followed the design of the ARC15 variant from the previous experiment. In one there was no stop codon, the other 3 followed the stop codon designs selected.
They were tested for yield over 50 days of in-lab evolution, with 3 repeats each. Proinsulin levels were quantified using ELISA plates according to manufacturer instructions (product number RAB0327) for proinsulin detection.

References 
1. 	L. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Engineering the robustness of industrial microbes through synthetic biology. [Preprint] (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2011.12.003.
2. 	M. T. Parker, A. M. Kunjapur, Deployment of Engineered Microbes: Contributions to the Bioeconomy and Considerations for Biosecurity. Health Secur 18 (2020).
3. 	O. S. Venturelli, R. G. Egbert, A. P. Arkin, Towards Engineering Biological Systems in a Broader Context. [Preprint] (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2015.10.025.
4. 	L. Clarke, R. Kitney, Developing synthetic biology for industrial biotechnology applications. [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20190349.
5. 	W. Zhang, D. R. Nielsen, Synthetic biology applications in industrial microbiology. [Preprint] (2014). https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00451.
6. 	L. Katz, Y. Y. Chen, R. Gonzalez, T. C. Peterson, H. Zhao, R. H. Baltz, Synthetic biology advances and applications in the biotechnology industry: a perspective. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 45 (2018).
7. 	B. W. Biggs, H. S. Alper, B. F. Pfleger, K. E. J. Tyo, C. N. S. Santos, P. K. Ajikumar, G. Stephanopoulos, Enabling commercial success of industrial biotechnology. [Preprint] (2021). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abj5040.
8. 	K. L. Arnolds, L. R. Dahlin, L. Ding, C. Wu, J. Yu, W. Xiong, C. Zuniga, Y. Suzuki, K. Zengler, J. G. Linger, M. T. Guarnieri, Biotechnology for secure biocontainment designs in an emerging bioeconomy. [Preprint] (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2021.05.004.
9. 	C. A. Voigt, Synthetic biology 2020–2030: six commercially-available products that are changing our world. [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20122-2.
10. 	E. T. Wurtzel, C. E. Vickers, A. D. Hanson, A. H. Millar, M. Cooper, K. P. Voss-Fels, P. I. Nikel, T. J. Erb, Revolutionizing agriculture with synthetic biology. Nat Plants 5 (2019).
11. 	J. C. Mortimer, Plant synthetic biology could drive a revolution in biofuels and medicine. [Preprint] (2019). https://doi.org/10.1177/1535370218793890.
12. 	J. Claesen, M. A. Fischbach, Synthetic microbes as drug delivery systems. ACS Synth Biol 4 (2015).
13. 	S. Slomovic, K. Pardee, J. J. Collins, Synthetic biology devices for in vitro and in vivo diagnostics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 (2015).
14. 	X. Tan, J. H. Letendre, J. J. Collins, W. W. Wong, Synthetic biology in the clinic: engineering vaccines, diagnostics, and therapeutics. [Preprint] (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.017.
15. 	J. L. Chlebek, S. P. Leonard, C. Kang-Yun, M. C. Yung, D. P. Ricci, Y. Jiao, D. M. Park, Prolonging genetic circuit stability through adaptive evolution of overlapping genes. Nucleic Acids Res 51 (2023).
16. 	S. C. Sleight, H. M. Sauro, Visualization of evolutionary stability dynamics and competitive fitness of Escherichia coli engineered with randomized multigene circuits. ACS Synth Biol 2 (2013).
17. 	S. C. Sleight, B. A. Bartley, J. A. Lieviant, H. M. Sauro, Designing and engineering evolutionary robust genetic circuits. J Biol Eng 4 (2010).
18. 	S. L. Nuismer, N. C. Layman, A. J. Redwood, B. Chan, J. J. Bull, Methods for measuring the evolutionary stability of engineered genomes to improve their longevity. Synth Biol 6 (2021).
19. 	M. Arbel-Groissman, I. Menuhin-Gruman, D. Naki, S. Bergman, T. Tuller, Fighting the battle against evolution: designing genetically modified organisms for evolutionary stability. [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.06.008.
20. 	M. Arbel-Groissman, I. Menuhin-Gruman, H. Yehezkeli, D. Naki, S. Bergman, Y. Udi, T. Tuller, “The Causes for Genomic Instability and How to Try and Reduce Them Through Rational Design of Synthetic DNA” in Methods in Molecular Biology (2024)vol. 2760.
21. 	I. Menuhin-Gruman, M. Arbel, N. Amitay, K. Sionov, D. Naki, I. Katzir, O. Edgar, S. Bergman, T. Tuller, Evolutionary Stability Optimizer (ESO): A Novel Approach to Identify and Avoid Mutational Hotspots in DNA Sequences while Maintaining High Expression Levels. ACS Synth Biol 11 (2022).
22. 	S. Yang, S. C. Sleight, H. M. Sauro, Rationally designed bidirectional promoter improves the evolutionary stability of synthetic genetic circuits. Nucleic Acids Res 41 (2013).
23. 	D. Ingram, G. B. Stan, Modelling genetic stability in engineered cell populations. Nat Commun 14 (2023).
24. 	B. R. Jack, S. P. Leonard, D. M. Mishler, B. A. Renda, D. Leon, G. A. Suárez, J. E. Barrick, Predicting the Genetic Stability of Engineered DNA Sequences with the EFM Calculator. ACS Synth Biol 4 (2014).
25. 	R. L. Williams, R. M. Murray, Integrase-mediated differentiation circuits improve evolutionary stability of burdensome and toxic functions in E. coli. Nat Commun 13 (2022).
26. 	H. I. Son, A. Weiss, L. You, Design patterns for engineering genetic stability. [Preprint] (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobme.2021.100297.
27. 	I. Frumkin, D. Schirman, A. Rotman, F. Li, L. Zahavi, E. Mordret, O. Asraf, S. Wu, S. F. Levy, Y. Pilpel, Gene Architectures that Minimize Cost of Gene Expression. Mol Cell 65 (2017).
28. 	B. A. Renda, M. J. Hammerling, J. E. Barrick, Engineering reduced evolutionary potential for synthetic biology. [Preprint] (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/c3mb70606k.
29. 	A. Willemsen, M. P. Zwart, On the stability of sequences inserted into viral genomes. Virus Evol 5 (2019).
30. 	P. Rugbjerg, N. Myling-Petersen, A. Porse, K. Sarup-Lytzen, M. O. A. Sommer, Diverse genetic error modes constrain large-scale bio-based production. Nat Commun 9 (2018).
31. 	B. R. Glick, Metabolic load and heterologous gene expression. [Preprint] (1995). https://doi.org/10.1016/0734-9750(95)00004-A.
32. 	O. Borkowski, C. Bricio, M. Murgiano, B. Rothschild-Mancinelli, G. B. Stan, T. Ellis, Cell-free prediction of protein expression costs for growing cells. Nat Commun 9 (2018).
33. 	J. F. Görgens, W. H. Van Zyl, J. H. Knoetze, B. Hahn-Hägerdal, The metabolic burden of the PGK1 and ADH2 promoter systems for heterologous xylanase production by saccharomyces cerevisiae in defined medium. Biotechnol Bioeng 73 (2001).
34. 	Q. Liu, J. Schumacher, X. Wan, C. Lou, B. Wang, Orthogonality and Burdens of Heterologous and Gate Gene Circuits in E. coli. ACS Synth Biol 7 (2018).
35. 	U. Sauer, Evolutionary engineering of industrially important microbial phenotypes. [Preprint] (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45300-8_7.
36. 	T. Frei, F. Cella, F. Tedeschi, J. Gutiérrez, G. B. Stan, M. Khammash, V. Siciliano, Characterization and mitigation of gene expression burden in mammalian cells. Nat Commun 11 (2020).
37. 	S. M. Brooks, H. S. Alper, Applications, challenges, and needs for employing synthetic biology beyond the lab. Nat Commun 12 (2021).
38. 	G. N. Mandel, G. E. Marchant, The living regulatory challenges of synthetic biology. [Preprint] (2014). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2410179.
39. 	B. Rager-Zisman, Ethical and regulatory challenges posed by synthetic biology. Perspect Biol Med 55 (2012).
40. 	A. Hossain, E. Lopez, S. M. Halper, D. P. Cetnar, A. C. Reis, D. Strickland, E. Klavins, H. M. Salis, Automated design of thousands of nonrepetitive parts for engineering stable genetic systems. Nat Biotechnol 38 (2020).
41. 	P. Cárdenas, Designing for durability: new tools to build stable, non-repetitive DNA. [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.1093/SYNBIO/YSAA016.
42. 	M. J. Liao, M. O. Din, L. Tsimring, J. Hasty, Rock-paper-scissors: Engineered population dynamics increase genetic stability. Science (1979) 365 (2019).
43. 	N. Dalchau, M. J. Smith, S. Martin, J. R. Brown, S. Emmott, A. Phillips, Towards the rational design of synthetic cells with prescribed population dynamics. J R Soc Interface 9 (2012).
44. 	H. Song, S. Payne, C. Tan, L. You, Programming microbial population dynamics by engineered cell-cell communication. [Preprint] (2011). https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100132.
45. 	A. L. Decrulle, A. Frénoy, T. A. Meiller-Legrand, A. Bernheim, C. Lotton, A. Gutierrez, A. B. Lindner, Engineering gene overlaps to sustain genetic constructs in vivo. PLoS Comput Biol 17 (2021).
46. 	T. Blazejewski, H. I. Ho, H. H. Wang, Synthetic sequence entanglement augments stability and containment of genetic information in cells. Science (1979) 365 (2019).
47. 	S. Raman, J. K. Rogers, N. D. Taylor, G. M. Church, Evolution-guided optimization of biosynthetic pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 (2014).
48. 	P. Rugbjerg, K. Sarup-Lytzen, M. Nagy, M. O. A. Sommer, Synthetic addiction extends the productive life time of engineered Escherichia coli populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 (2018).
49. 	A. C. Stiebler, J. Freitag, K. O. Schink, T. Stehlik, B. A. M. Tillmann, J. Ast, M. Bölker, Ribosomal Readthrough at a Short UGA Stop Codon Context Triggers Dual Localization of Metabolic Enzymes in Fungi and Animals. PLoS Genet 10 (2014).
50. 	J. M. L. Ho, C. A. Miller, S. E. Parks, J. R. Mattia, M. R. Bennett, A suppressor tRNA-mediated feedforward loop eliminates leaky gene expression in bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res 49 (2021).
51. 	O. D. Caspari, Introduction of a leaky stop codon as molecular tool in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. PLoS One 15 (2020).
52. 	K. M. Keeling, J. Lanier, M. Du, J. Salas-Marco, L. Gao, A. Kaenjak-Angeletti, D. M. Bedwell, Leaky termination at premature stop codons antagonizes nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in S. cerevisiae. RNA 10 (2004).
53. 	A. V. Uversky, V. N. Uversky, Amino acid code for potein folding, misfolding, and non-folding. Amino Acids, Peptides and Proteins 39 (2015).
54. 	J. Y. Yang, M. Yang, Predicting protein disorder by analyzing amino acid sequence. BMC Genomics 9 (2008).
55. 	N. Rajasekaran, S. Gopi, A. Narayan, A. N. Naganathan, Quantifying Protein Disorder through Measures of Excess Conformational Entropy. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 120 (2016).
56. 	J. A. Raskatov, D. B. Teplow, Using chirality to probe the conformational dynamics and assembly of intrinsically disordered amyloid proteins. Sci Rep 7 (2017).
57. 	V. Receveur-Bréhot, J. M. Bourhis, V. N. Uversky, B. Canard, S. Longhi, Assessing protein disorder and induced folding. Proteins: Structure, Function and Genetics 62 (2006).
58. 	A. Toto, F. Malagrinò, L. Visconti, F. Troilo, L. Pagano, M. Brunori, P. Jemth, S. Gianni, Templated folding of intrinsically disordered proteins. [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.REV120.012413.
59. 	R. A. George, J. Heringa, An analysis of protein domain linkers: Their classification and role in protein folding. Protein Eng 15 (2002).
60. 	J. S. Klein, S. Jiang, R. P. Galimidi, J. R. Keeffe, P. J. Bjorkman, L. Regan, “Design and characterization of structured protein linkers with differing flexibilities” in Protein Engineering, Design and Selection (2014)vol. 27.
61. 	V. Presnyak, N. Alhusaini, Y. H. Chen, S. Martin, N. Morris, N. Kline, S. Olson, D. Weinberg, K. E. Baker, B. R. Graveley, J. Coller, Codon optimality is a major determinant of mRNA stability. Cell 160 (2015).
62. 	S. G. Medina-Muñoz, G. Kushawah, L. A. Castellano, M. Diez, M. L. DeVore, M. J. B. Salazar, A. A. Bazzini, Crosstalk between codon optimality and cis-regulatory elements dictates mRNA stability. Genome Biol 22 (2021).
63. 	H. Zhang, L. Zhang, A. Lin, C. Xu, Z. Li, K. Liu, B. Liu, X. Ma, F. Zhao, H. Jiang, C. Chen, H. Shen, H. Li, D. H. Mathews, Y. Zhang, L. Huang, Algorithm for optimized mRNA design improves stability and immunogenicity. Nature 621 (2023).
64. 	Ib Jonassen, Ib G. Clausen, Ejner B. Jensen, Allan Svendsen, US5324641 (1994). https://patents.google.com/patent/US5324641A/en.
65. 	I. Yofe, U. Weill, M. Meurer, S. Chuartzman, E. Zalckvar, O. Goldman, S. Ben-Dor, C. Schütze, N. Wiedemann, M. Knop, A. Khmelinskii, M. Schuldiner, One library to make them all: Streamlining the creation of yeast libraries via a SWAp-Tag strategy. Nat Methods 13 (2016).
66. 	U. Weill, I. Yofe, E. Sass, B. Stynen, D. Davidi, J. Natarajan, R. Ben-Menachem, Z. Avihou, O. Goldman, N. Harpaz, S. Chuartzman, K. Kniazev, B. Knoblach, J. Laborenz, F. Boos, J. Kowarzyk, S. Ben-Dor, E. Zalckvar, J. M. Herrmann, R. A. Rachubinski, O. Pines, D. Rapaport, S. W. Michnick, E. D. Levy, M. Schuldiner, Genome-wide SWAp-Tag yeast libraries for proteome exploration. Nat Methods 15 (2018).
67. 	M. Chalfie, Green fluorescent protein as a marker for gene expression. Trends in Genetics 10 (1994).
68. 	G. S. Waldo, B. M. Standish, J. Berendzen, T. C. Terwilliger, “Rapid protein-folding assay using green fluorescent protein” (1999); http://biotech.nature.com.
69. 	M. G. Romei, S. G. Boxer, Split Green Fluorescent Proteins: Scope, Limitations, and Outlook. [Preprint] (2019). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys-051013-022846.
70. 	J. Kong, Y. Wang, W. Qi, M. Huang, R. Su, Z. He, Green fluorescent protein inspired fluorophores. [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102286.
71. 	S. R. Kain, Green fluorescent protein (GFP): Applications in cell-based assays for drug discovery. [Preprint] (1999). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6446(99)01330-6.
72. 	M. Meurer, Y. Duan, E. Sass, I. Kats, K. Herbst, B. C. Buchmuller, V. Dederer, F. Huber, D. Kirrmaier, M. Štefl, K. Van Laer, T. P. Dick, M. K. Lemberg, A. Khmelinskii, E. D. Levy, M. Knop, Genome-wide C-SWAT library for high-throughput yeast genome tagging. Nat Methods 15 (2018).
73. 	A. R. Hieb, S. D’Arcy, M. A. Kramer, A. E. White, K. Luger, Fluorescence strategies for high-throughput quantification of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 40 (2012).
74. 	J. A. J. Arpino, P. J. Rizkallah, D. D. Jones, Structural and dynamic changes associated with beneficial engineered single-amino-acid deletion mutations in enhanced green fluorescent protein. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 70 (2014).
75. 	L. Pillai-Kastoori, S. Heaton, S. D. Shiflett, A. C. Roberts, A. Solache, A. R. Schutz-Geschwender, Antibody validation for Western blot: By the user, for the user. Journal of Biological Chemistry 295 (2020).
76. 	J. E. Gilda, R. Ghosh, J. X. Cheah, T. M. West, S. C. Bodine, A. V. Gomes, Western blotting inaccuracies with unverified antibodies: Need for a Western Blotting Minimal Reporting Standard (WBMRS). PLoS One 10 (2015).
77. 	S. C. Taylor, L. K. Rosselli-Murai, B. Crobeddu, I. Plante, A critical path to producing high quality, reproducible data from quantitative western blot experiments. Sci Rep 12 (2022).
78. 	S. C. Taylor, A. Posch, The design of a quantitative western blot experiment. [Preprint] (2014). https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/361590.
79. 	H. P. J. Buermans, J. T. den Dunnen, Next generation sequencing technology: Advances and applications. [Preprint] (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.06.015.
80. 	M. dos Reis, R. Savva, L. Wernisch, Solving the riddle of codon usage preferences: A test for translational selection. Nucleic Acids Res 32 (2004).
81. 	P. M. Sharp, W. H. Li, The codon adaptation index-a measure of directional synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucleic Acids Res 15 (1987).
82. 	D. A. Kiktev, Z. Sheng, K. S. Lobachev, T. D. Petes, GC content elevates mutation and recombination rates in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 (2018).
83. 	Z. R. Yang, R. Thomson, P. McNeil, R. M. Esnouf, RONN: The bio-basis function neural network technique applied to the detection of natively disordered regions in proteins. Bioinformatics 21 (2005).
84. 	B. Mészáros, G. Erdös, Z. Dosztányi, IUPred2A: Context-dependent prediction of protein disorder as a function of redox state and protein binding. Nucleic Acids Res 46 (2018).
85. 	H. Zur, T. Tuller, Exploiting hidden information interleaved in the redundancy of the genetic code without prior knowledge. Bioinformatics 31 (2015).
86. 	E. Fix, J. L. Hodges, Discriminatory Analysis. Nonparametric Discrimination: Consistency Properties. Int Stat Rev 57 (1989).
87. 	T. Chen, C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2016)vols. 13-17-August-2016.
88. 	C. H. D. Moor, M. Jansen, E. J. Bonte, A. A. M. Thomas, J. S. Sussenbach, J. L. Van Den Brande, Influence of the Four Leader Sequences of the Human Insulin‐Like‐Growth‐Factor‐2 mRNAs on the Expression of Reporter Genes. Eur J Biochem 226 (1994).
89. 	T. Kjeldsen, A. F. Pettersson, M. Hach, I. Diers, S. Havelund, P. H. Hansen, A. S. Andersen, Synthetic leaders with potential BiP binding mediate high-yield secretion of correctly folded insulin precursors from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Protein Expr Purif 9 (1997).
90. 	T. Kjeldsen, Yeast secretory expression of insulin precursors. [Preprint] (2000). https://doi.org/10.1007/s002530000402.
91. 	C. K. Min, Y. J. Son, C. K. Kim, S. J. Park, J. W. Lee, Increased expression, folding and enzyme reaction rate of recombinant human insulin by selecting appropriate leader peptide. J Biotechnol 151 (2011).
92. 	L. Thim, M. T. Hansen, K. Norris, I. Hoegh, E. Boel, J. Forstrom, G. Ammerer, N. P. Fiil, Secretion and processing of insulin precursors in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83 (1986).
93. 	H. Teerink, H. O. Voorma, A. A. M. Thomas, The human insulin-like growth factor II leader 1 contains an internal ribosomal entry site. BBA - Gene Structure and Expression 1264 (1995).
94. 	H. Yang, M. L. Adamo, A. P. Koval, M. C. McGuinness, H. Ben-Hur, Y. Yang, D. LeRoith, C. T. Roberts, Alternative leader sequences in insulin-like growth factor I mRNAs modulate translational efficiency and encode multiple signal peptides. Molecular Endocrinology 9 (1995).
95. 	W. De Coster, R. Rademakers, NanoPack2: population-scale evaluation of long-read sequencing data. Bioinformatics 39 (2023).
96. 	H. Li, New strategies to improve minimap2 alignment accuracy. Bioinformatics 37 (2021).
97. 	R. Patro, G. Duggal, M. I. Love, R. A. Irizarry, C. Kingsford, Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14 (2017).
98. 	R. Poplin, P. C. Chang, D. Alexander, S. Schwartz, T. Colthurst, A. Ku, D. Newburger, J. Dijamco, N. Nguyen, P. T. Afshar, S. S. Gross, L. Dorfman, C. Y. McLean, M. A. Depristo, A universal snp and small-indel variant caller using deep neural networks. Nat Biotechnol 36 (2018).
99. 	D. A. Drummond, C. O. Wilke, Mistranslation-Induced Protein Misfolding as a Dominant Constraint on Coding-Sequence Evolution. Cell 134 (2008).
100. 	A. A. Komar, E. Samatova, M. V. Rodnina, Translation Rates and Protein Folding. [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2023.168384.
101. 	A. E. Hirsh, H. B. Fraser, D. P. Wall, Adjusting for selection on synonymous sites in estimates of evolutionary distance. Mol Biol Evol 22 (2005).
102. 	W. Lv, J. Zheng, M. Luan, M. Shi, H. Zhu, M. Zhang, H. Lv, Z. Shang, L. Duan, R. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Comparing the evolutionary conservation between human essential genes, human orthologs of mouse essential genes and human housekeeping genes. Brief Bioinform 16 (2015).
103. 	M. M. Albà, J. Castresana, Inverse relationship between evolutionary rate and age of mammalian genes. Mol Biol Evol 22 (2005).
104. 	H. Zhang, Z. Lyu, Y. Fan, C. R. Evans, K. W. Barber, K. Banerjee, O. A. Igoshin, J. Rinehart, J. Ling, Metabolic stress promotes stop-codon readthrough and phenotypic heterogeneity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 (2020).
105. 	Y. Fan, C. R. Evans, K. W. Barber, K. Banerjee, K. J. Weiss, W. Margolin, O. A. Igoshin, J. Rinehart, J. Ling, Heterogeneity of Stop Codon Readthrough in Single Bacterial Cells and Implications for Population Fitness. Mol Cell 67 (2017).
106. 	I. Jungreis, M. F. Lin, R. Spokony, C. S. Chan, N. Negre, A. Victorsen, K. P. White, M. Kellis, Evidence of abundant stop codon readthrough in Drosophila and other metazoa. Genome Res 21 (2011).
107. 	G. Loughran, M. Y. Chou, I. P. Ivanov, I. Jungreis, M. Kellis, A. M. Kiran, P. V. Baranov, J. F. Atkins, Evidence of efficient stop codon readthrough in four mammalian genes. Nucleic Acids Res 42 (2014).
108. 	L. E. Manjunath, A. Singh, S. Som, S. M. Eswarappa, Mammalian proteome expansion by stop codon readthrough. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA 14 (2023).
109. 	M. Wang, K. Zhang, V. Ngo, C. Liu, S. Fan, J. W. Whitaker, Y. Chen, R. Ai, Z. Chen, J. Wang, L. Zheng, W. Wang, Identification of DNA motifs that regulate DNA methylation. Nucleic Acids Res 47 (2019).
110. 	W. H. Lin, E. Kussell, Evolutionary pressures on simple sequence repeats in prokaryotic coding regions. Nucleic Acids Res 40 (2012).
111. 	E. Li, Y. Zhang, DNA methylation in mammals. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 (2014).
112. 	K. M. Glastad, B. G. Hunt, S. V. Yi, M. A. D. Goodisman, DNA methylation in insects: On the brink of the epigenomic era. [Preprint] (2011). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2583.2011.01092.x.
113. 	M. Curradi, A. Izzo, G. Badaracco, N. Landsberger, Molecular Mechanisms of Gene Silencing Mediated by DNA Methylation. Mol Cell Biol 22 (2002).
114. 	J. Newell-Price, A. J. L. Clark, P. King, DNA methylation and silencing of gene expression. [Preprint] (2000). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043-2760(00)00248-4.
115. 	S. Rajeevkumar, P. Anunanthini, R. Sathishkumar, Epigenetic silencing in transgenic plants. [Preprint] (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00693.
116. 	S. I. S. Grewal, D. Moazed, Heterochromatin and epigenetic control of gene expression. [Preprint] (2003). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1086887.
117. 	J. M. Fox, I. Erill, Relative codon adaptation: A generic codon bias index for prediction of gene expression. DNA Research 17 (2010).
118. 	F. Wright, The “effective number of codons” used in a gene. Gene 87 (1990).
119. 	R. Lorenz, S. H. Bernhart, C. Höner zu Siederdissen, H. Tafer, C. Flamm, P. F. Stadler, I. L. Hofacker, ViennaRNA Package 2.0. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 6 (2011).
120. 	J. R. Lobry, C. Gautier, Hydrophobicity, expressivity and aromaticity are the major trends of amino-acid usage in 999 escherichia coli chromosome-encoded genes. Nucleic Acids Res 22 (1994).
121. 	S. M. Lundberg, S. I. Lee, A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017-December, 4766–4775 (2017).
122. 	J. P. Ferreira, K. W. Overton, C. L. Wang, Tuning gene expression with synthetic upstream open reading frames. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 (2013).
123. 	J. G. Canestrari, E. Lasek-Nesselquist, A. Upadhyay, M. Rofaeil, M. M. Champion, J. T. Wade, K. M. Derbyshire, T. A. Gray, Polycysteine-encoding leaderless short ORFs function as cysteine-responsive attenuators of operonic gene expression in mycobacteria. Mol Microbiol 114, 93–108 (2020).
124. 	A. Moustakas, T. S. Sonstegard, P. B. Hackett, Alterations of the three short open reading frames in the Rous sarcoma virus leader RNA modulate viral replication and gene expression. J Virol 67 (1993).
125. 	U. Roymondal, S. Das, S. Sahoo, Predicting gene expression level from relative codon usage bias: An application to escherichia coli genome. DNA Research 16 (2009).
126. 	S. Grünert, R. J. Jackson, The immediate downstream codon strongly influences the efficiency of utilization of eukaryotic translation initiation codons. EMBO Journal 13 (1994).
127. 	H. Miyasaka, The positive relationship between codon usage bias and translation initiation AUG context in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 15 (1999).
128. 	T. Sato, M. Terabe, H. Watanabe, T. Gojobori, C. Hori-Takemoto, K. I. Miura, Codon and base biases after the initiation codon of the open reading frames in the Escherichia coli genome and their influence on the translation efficiency. J Biochem 129 (2001).
129. 	T. Tuller, A. Carmi, K. Vestsigian, S. Navon, Y. Dorfan, J. Zaborske, T. Pan, O. Dahan, I. Furman, Y. Pilpel, An evolutionarily conserved mechanism for controlling the efficiency of protein translation. Cell 141 (2010).
130. 	Y. Rong, S. I. Jensen, K. Lindorff-Larsen, A. T. Nielsen, Folding of heterologous proteins in bacterial cell factories: Cellular mechanisms and engineering strategies. [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2022.108079.
131. 	C. Kurland, J. Gallant, Errors of heterologous protein expression. Curr Opin Biotechnol 7 (1996).
132. 	A. Ohno, J. I. Maruyama, T. Nemoto, M. Arioka, K. Kitamoto, A carrier fusion significantly induces unfolded protein response in heterologous protein production by Aspergillus oryzae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 92 (2011).
133. 	E. V. Grosfeld, A. Y. Beizer, A. A. Dergalev, M. O. Agaphonov, A. I. Alexandrov, Fusion of Hsp70 to GFP Impairs Its Function and Causes Formation of Misfolded Protein Deposits under Mild Stress in Yeast. Int J Mol Sci 24 (2023).
134. 	J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland, C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie, B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy, M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer, S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O. Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, D. Hassabis, Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596 (2021).
135. 	K. Sugase, H. J. Dyson, P. E. Wright, Mechanism of coupled folding and binding of an intrinsically disordered protein. Nature 447 (2007).
136. 	B. Mészáros, L. Dobson, E. Fichó, G. E. Tusnády, Z. Dosztányi, I. Simon, Sequential, Structural and Functional Properties of Protein Complexes Are Defined by How Folding and Binding Intertwine. J Mol Biol 431 (2019).
137. 	V. Zulkower, S. Rosser, DNA Chisel, a versatile sequence optimizer. Bioinformatics 36 (2020).
138. 	T. Tuller, Y. Y. Waldman, M. Kupiec, E. Ruppin, Translation efficiency is determined by both codon bias and folding energy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 (2010).
139. 	J. Yin, L. Bao, H. Tian, X. Gao, W. Yao, Quantitative relationship between the mRNA secondary structure of translational initiation region and the expression level of heterologous protein in Escherichia coli. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 43 (2016).
140. 	M. H. De Smit, J. Van Duin, Control of translation by mRNA secondary structure in Escherichia coli. A quantitative analysis of literature data. J Mol Biol 244 (1994).
141. 	A. Espah Borujeni, H. M. Salis, Translation Initiation is Controlled by RNA Folding Kinetics via a Ribosome Drafting Mechanism. J Am Chem Soc 138 (2016).
142. 	M. Peeri, T. Tuller, High-resolution modeling of the selection on local mRNA folding strength in coding sequences across the tree of life. Genome Biol 21 (2020).
143. 	W. Gu, T. Zhou, C. O. Wilke, A universal trend of reduced mRNA stability near the translation-initiation site in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. PLoS Comput Biol 6 (2010).
144. 	H. Karaoglu, C. M. Y. Lee, W. Meyer, Survey of simple sequence repeats in completed fungal genomes. Mol Biol Evol 22 (2005).
145. 	D. Tautz, C. Schlötterer, Simple sequences. Curr Opin Genet Dev 4 (1994).
146. 	D. Tautz, Hypervariabflity of simple sequences as a general source for polymorphic DNA markers. Nucleic Acids Res 17 (1989).
147. 	P. H. Oliveira, F. Lemos, G. A. Monteiro, D. M. F. Prazeres, Recombination frequency in plasmid DNA containing direct repeats-predictive correlation with repeat and intervening sequence length. Plasmid 60 (2008).
148. 	N. Phadnis, R. A. Sia, E. A. Sia, Analysis of repeat-mediated deletions in the mitochondrial genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 171 (2005).
149. 	C. J. Saveson, S. T. Lovett, Enhanced deletion formation by aberrant DNA replication in Escherichia coli. Genetics 146 (1997).
150. 	R. E. Lenski, T. T. Nguyen, Stability of recombinant DNA and its effects on fitness. Trends Ecol Evol 3 (1988).
151. 	X. Li, W. D. Heyer, Homologous recombination in DNA repair and DNA damage tolerance. [Preprint] (2008). https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2008.1.
152. 	S. T. Lovett, Encoded errors: Mutations and rearrangements mediated by misalignment at repetitive DNA sequences. [Preprint] (2004). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04076.x.
153. 	I. B. Rogozin, Y. I. Pavlov, Theoretical analysis of mutation hotspots and their DNA sequence context specificity. [Preprint] (2003). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1383-5742(03)00032-2.
154. 	A. Nishimura, K. Nakagami, K. Kan, F. Morita, H. Takagi, Arginine inhibits Saccharomyces cerevisiae biofilm formation by inducing endocytosis of the arginine transporter Can1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 86 (2022).
155. 	P. Zhang, X. Hu, Metabolic engineering of arginine permeases to reduce the formation of urea in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 34 (2018).
156. 	M. Ahmad, H. Bussey, Yeast arginine permease: nucleotide sequence of the CAN1 gene. Curr Genet 10 (1986).
157. 	B. Regenberg, M. C. Kielland‐Brandt, Amino acid residues important for substrate specificity of the amino acid permeases Can1p and Gnp1p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 18 (2001).
158. 	P. A. Fantes, J. Creanor, Canavanine resistance and the mechanism of arginine uptake in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. J Gen Microbiol 130 (1984).
159. 	J. Fu, X. Bian, S. Hu, H. Wang, F. Huang, P. M. Seibert, A. Plaza, L. Xia, R. Müller, A. F. Stewart, Y. Zhang, Full-length RecE enhances linear-linear homologous recombination and facilitates direct cloning for bioprospecting. Nat Biotechnol 30 (2012).
160. 	H. Okayama, P. Berg, High-efficiency cloning of full-length cDNA. Mol Cell Biol 2 (1982).
161. 	K. Volkenborn, L. Kuschmierz, N. Benz, P. Lenz, A. Knapp, K. E. Jaeger, The length of ribosomal binding site spacer sequence controls the production yield for intracellular and secreted proteins by Bacillus subtilis. Microb Cell Fact 19 (2020).
162. 	N. Rajasekaran, C. M. Kaiser, Co-Translational Folding of Multi-Domain Proteins. [Preprint] (2022). https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2022.869027.
163. 	A. Beygmoradi, A. Homaei, R. Hemmati, P. Fernandes, Recombinant protein expression: Challenges in production and folding related matters. [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.123407.
164. 	J. Marino, G. Von Heijne, R. Beckmann, Small protein domains fold inside the ribosome exit tunnel. FEBS Lett 590 (2016).
165. 	S. W. Englander, L. Mayne, The case for defined protein folding pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 (2017).
166. 	K. Mangkalaphiban, F. He, R. Ganesan, C. Wu, R. Baker, A. Jacobson, Transcriptome-wide investigation of stop codon readthrough in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS Genet 17 (2021).
 

Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Maya Schuldiner lab, for providing us with SWAp-Tag strains and data. We thank Dr. Daniel Dovrat for helpful discussions and comments. 
Funding: S.B. is supported by a fellowship from the Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics at Tel Aviv University. The study was also supported by a donation from Lonza Bioscience to the TAU IGEM team, and by a grant from the Israeli innovation authority. 
Author contributions:
IMG: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Visualization, Investigation, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. TT: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Funding acquisition, Software, Formal analysis, Visualization, Investigation, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. MAG: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Investigation, Validation, Writing – original draft. SB: Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. DN: Data curation, Resources, Investigation, Validation, Writing – original draft.Author Contributions: IMG:  Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. MAG: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Investigation. DN: Investigation SB: Data Curation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. TT: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation.


Competing Interest: We submitted patent request related to this paper.
Data and Materials Availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.


Supplementary Materials
The PDF file includes:
Supplementary Text
Supplementary Figs. 1 to 4
Supplementary Tables 1 to 4
Legends for data all Supplementary figures and tables 
 
Figure 1 – components of the STABLES solution:  A. Standard production of a heterological gene. The heterologous Gene of Interest (GOI) is inserted into the genome. Any mutations that reduce expression or induce misfolding would prove advantageous due to the lower metabolic burden. These mutations proliferate, and a batch must be replaced. B. Replacement of an endogenous gene (EG) with a fusion gene. An endogenous gene is removed and replaced by a fusion gene composed of the GOI and EG. Mutations leading to loss of expression or misfolding would be deleterious to the EG, resulting in host death. This limits the spread of many mutations. The EG is selected by an ML model trained on experimental data. C. Selection of linker. Different linkers may lead to interaction between the fused proteins and misfolding. Using biophysical models and a database of fusion linkers, a linker is selected to minimize structural changes between the fused and unfused state. D. Sequence optimization. By optimizing the sequence of the GOI and linker, hypermutable sites are avoided, codon usage bias is maximized, and weak mRNA folding is enforced at the start of gene. This further improves stability and expression. E.  A leaky stop codon enables translation of both GOI and the fusion gene. A leaky stop codon is placed between the GOI and linker. Due to partial read-through, both the protein of interest and the fusion protein are generated. By informed selection of stop codon, large quantities of the protein of interest and just viable quantities of the fusion protein are produced. The GOI’s mutational stability is further enhanced, as more mutations would prove deleterious. F.  Production of the heterological gene, aided by STABLES. The adapted process has much higher mutational stability, reducing the need to replace batches. The optimized cells exhibit much higher expression.


 
Figure 2 – A computational model for EG selection:  A. Motivation for developing EG selection model development - Ratio between the final and initial fluorescence for 10 EG after 15 days. Final-to-initial fluorescence ratios for 10 EGs fused to GFP or unfused GFP (2nd from left) after 15 days of evolution. Values represent means from three replicates per conditionEach bar represents either GFP fused to a different endogenous gene, or the unfused GFP (2nd from left). The value represents the mean ratio between final and initial fluorescence, for an experiment running for 15 days, with 3 repeats each. Fused constructs genes retained maintain higher rates of fluorescence than unfused GFP at the end of the experiment (student t-test,P≈0.048), indicating greater stabilitythus more stable. The observed variability among constructsThe different experiments have different ratios throughout the experiment (Kruskal-H,P≈0.035), emphasizes the importance of rational EG selection. demonstrating the need for gene selection. SEC2 showed significantly improved stability over unfused GFP We have shown that SEC2 is more stable than unfused GFP (student t-test,P≈0.047). We successfully predicted the top performing gene with our model. B. Gene Selection Model Model Pipeline. Experimental data (65, 66) covering 6,685 EGs and two GOIs was used to extract biologically meaningful features, encompassing properties of the EG, GOI, and their interactions. was used as input, comprising measurements for 6,685 EGs and 2 GOI. Biologically meaningful features were extracted to describe the EG, the GOI, and their interactions. Training and validation splits were used for feature engineering and model tuning. An ensemble of K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) and XGBoost (XGB) models was selected based on consistent performance across splits. For each randomized split of the training and validation data, feature processing and hyperparameter tuning were performed to optimize model performance. After analysing results across all splits, an ensemble approach combining K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) and XGBoost (XGB) models was selected. C. Performance among top 3 recommendations. In each bootstrap resample, model predictions were converted into quantiles. Model architectures were compared using the highest-performing EG among their top three predictions, reflecting expected performance when testing three fusion constructs. For the selected architecture, The different models were compared based on their top recommendations. Test data were resampled using the bootstrap method, and each model’s top three predictions were converted into quantiles within the resampled dataset. For each model, thethe x-axis shows displaysthe highest-scoring EG among its top threetop score among recommendations, reflecting the expected performance when testing three fusion constructs. The y-axis indicates the fraction of bootstrap samples falling intowithin each performance bin. Predictions were consistently near-optimal (median quantile = 0.995), The distribution demonstrates near-optimal results, with a median quantile of 0.995 with a low likelihood and a very low probability (P ≈ 0.048) of scoring below 0.98.of achieving a score below 0.98. D. Performance for top recommendation. . Similar analysis for the single top recommendation yielded a median quantile of 0.939, with rare scores below 0.92 A similar analysis was conducted, taking only the top candidate. Good performance can be expected, with a median score of 0.939. The probability of a score less than 0.92 is very low (P≈0.007). E. Distribution of tTop 20 Shapley Values. Across 20 XGB Models Averaged across 20 XGB models, tRNA adaptation index (tAI) emerged as the most predictive feature, followed by . The graph shows the distribution of the top 20 Shapley Values, averaged across 20 XGB models, to assess feature importance in predicting fusion gene performance. The tRNA Adaptation Index (tAI) emerges as the most predictive feature. Following, features of importance include those related to GC content, codon usage bias, alternative ORF lengths, mRNA folding energy, and amino acid composition similarity between EG and GOI.

 

Figure 3 – Demonstration of STABLES: improving expression of proinsulin expression in S. cerevisiae: A. Design of the Proinsulin eEvolution eExperiment. The design schematics of the variants inof the first proinsulin evolution experiment areis displayed for clarity. B. Gene fusion affects expression levels at time zero0. ELISA measurements of proinsulin expression in six configurations—unfused or fused to CAF20 or ARC15, with or without leader sequence—at day 0The expression level of proinsulin either unfused or fused to CAF20 or ARC15, with or without leader sequence, as measured by ELISA at the beginning of the lab evolution experiment. As previously shown, the leader sequence is essential for expressing unfused proinsulinAs previously demonstrated for the unfused case, the leader sequence is vital for expressing proinsulin. For fusion constructs, it significantly improves expression, potentially due to increased mRNA stability or improved protein localization in the cellFor the fused genes, it proved to be of high importance. This might be due to increased RNA stability or better localization of the protein in the cell.  C.  Proinsulin production over time. ELISA measurements were taken every 5 days (n=3 per timepoint) for four variants: (1) Baseline—Novo Nordisk’s patented sequence, integrated at CAN1 locus; (2) Optimized—same structure with proinsulin and linker optimized by ESO (21); (3,4) Fusions—proinsulin fused to CAF20 or ARC15.Proinsulin expression was measured by ELISA every 5 days, with 3 repeats, for each of 4 variants. The baseline variant is the original sequence, as patented by Novo Nordisk. The gene is placed instead of CAN1. The second variant is identical in structure, but with the proinsulin and linker optimized by ESO. The third and fourth are fusion genes, where proinsulin is fused with CAF20 and ARC15 respectively. Fusion genes were synthesized using the full STABLES pipeline (EG selection, linker choice, leader inclusion, and codon optimization). The fusion genes were synthesized according to our design, including selection of EG, selection linker, addition of leader sequence, and sequence optimization. Expression decay over time fits an exponential model, supported by high R² in log-linear spaceWe assume exponential decay, supported by the high R^2 on this linear estimation in log scale (P<10^(-6)). The variants exhibit significantly different decay rates The curves have different decay rates (ANOVA F-test, P<10^(-19)). with the STABLES-designed constructs showing substantially improved stabilityThe variants of our design demonstrate a large improvement in stability. D. Normalized cCumulative pProinsulin Generation Across Variants and Timespansproduction. Integrating the fitted expression curves yields the cumulative expression per variant. All values were normalized by the 10-day cumulative expression of the baseline variant. STABLES-derived variants exhibited greatly increased cumulative yields across timepoints, illustrating improved production through rational EG fusion design.Based on the exponential decay model, we can integrate the expression over time, giving us an estimate of the true value of interest - cumulative expression over time. We normalized all values by the estimated cumulative expression for the baseline variant over 10 days. This table presents the expected amount of proinsulin generated by each variant at different times. The variants of our design have much higher cumulative expression.

 

Figure 4 – Experimental study of STABLES results and components: A. Mutation accumulated in an the in-lab evolution experiment 88,89. Nanopore sequencing revealed widespread deletions following in-lab evolution: (A) unfused proinsulin lost most of its promoter and coding sequence; (B) ARC15 fusion showed large promoter deletions and smaller mutations in both promoter and proinsulin; (C) CAF20 fusion retained most of its structure, with only minor mutations across the construct. (A) Nano-pore sequencing of unfused proinsulin shows that after the in-lab evolution experiment, most of the promotor and the reading frame of insulin were erased from the plasmid. (B) Nano-pore sequencing of proinsulin fused to ARC15 reveals a large deletion in the promoter, and a few small deletions in the promotor region and the proinsulin coding region. (C) Nano-pore sequencing of proinsulin fused to CAF20 shows a few mutations in the proinsulin coding region, the promotor and in CAF20. B. Western Blot Validation. Western blot confirms that CAF20 and ARC15 fusions yield prolonged proinsulin expression compared to unfused constructs.Western Blot analysis validates our findings – the fused variants expressed proinsulin for much longer than the unfused variant. Actin measurements were taken for control. C. LDesign of leaky stop codon construct design. Schematic of construct used to assess translation read-through rates of leaky stop codons using BFP and mCherry fusionThe design of the stop codon experiment is displayed for clarity. D. Determining the Ttermination efficiency of different leaky stop codons. Various constructs were tested, each linking BFP and mCherry via different leaky stop codons. Fluorescence intensity of each fluorophore (normalized to standalone expression) served as a proxy for read-through efficiency. Three top-performing designs (L1–L3, see Fig. 4.E.) and three rejected variants (with too high or low read-through) are shown. BFP signal represents GOI expression; mCherry, the C-terminal EG. BFP and mCherry were fused using different leaky stop codons in the linker. The fluorescence of each was measured as proxy for expression level, normalized by the non-fused expression level. The red bar is mCherry expression, which was fused to the C' terminal of BFP, analogous to EG in our design. The blue bar is the expression of BFP, analogous to the GOI. In the graph, 3 representatives of the L1-3 stop codon design (see Fig. 4.E.) are presented, as are 3 representatives of codons not selected, due to read-through rate which was either too low or high. E. Proinsulin concentration expression over time for different leaky stop codons. ARC15 fusions were built with three different leaky stop codons and without as control. ELISA measurements over 50 days demonstrated that all leaky stop codons improved protein stabilityProinsulin was fused with ARC15 four times, each with a different stop codon. This graph illustrates the proinsulin concentration measured by ELISA over 50 days. Using any leaky stop codon improved the stability of the gene fusion (student t-test at t=40, P<10^(-5)). Distinct expression profiles among codons Different codons lead to different expression profiles (Kruskal H-test, P<0.003), emphasizeing the need for informed selection. The leaky stopAll selected codons preserve were selected such that the last amino acid of proinsulin is maintained, employ, twe utilize the design principles outlined in (166), and select stop codons which displayed a read-through rate of 0.1-0.25 in the previous experiment. Sequences used (stop codon + 3 downstream nt)The sequences used for the stop codon and the 3 nt afterwards were: L1 – TAGGCG. L2 – TGAGCG. L3 – TGACAA.
